Feature docs example notebooks (#534)
calliope-project/calliope: docs/examples/2_urban_scale/index.md

# Urban Scale Example Model

This example consists of two possible sources of electricity,
one possible source of heat,
and one possible source of simultaneous heat and electricity.
There are three locations, each describing a building, with transmission links between them.

The diagram below gives an overview:

<figure>
<img src="../../img/example_overview_urban.svg", width="100%", style="background-color:white;", alt="Urban scale example model overview">
<figcaption>Urban scale example model overview</figcaption>
</figure>

We distinguish between model _configuration_ (the options provided to Calliope to do its work)
and the model _definition_ (your representation of a physical system in YAML).

## Model configuration

The model configuration file `model.yaml` is the place to tell Calliope about how to interpret the model definition and how to build and solve your model.
It does not contain much data, but the scaffolding with which to construct and run your model.

You will notice that we load a custom math file in `config.init`.

> You can find out more about this custom math [here](#custom-math)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find out more about this custom math [below](#interlude-custom-math).
```

One file with the top-level keys `config`, `parameters`, `techs`, `nodes`, `tech_groups`, `node_groups`, `scenarios`, `overrides`.
However, this tends to become unwieldy.

Instead, various parts of the model are defined in different files and then we `import` them in the YAML file that we are going to load into calliope (`calliope.Model("my_main_model_file.yaml")`).
The import section in our file looks like this:

```yaml
--8<-- "src/calliope/example_models/urban_scale/model.yaml:import"
```

## Model definition

### Top-level parameters

Before we dive into the technologies and nodes in the model, we have defined some parameters that are independent of both of these:

```yaml
--8<-- "src/calliope/example_models/urban_scale/model.yaml:parameters"
```

Neither of these parameters is strictly necessary to define.
They have defaults assigned to them (see the model definition schema in the `reference` section of the documentation).
However, we have included them in here as examples.

`objective_cost_weights` can be used to weight different cost classes in the objective function
(e.g., if we had `co2_emissions` as well as `monetary` costs).

> `bigM` (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_M_method) is used to formulate certain types of constraints and should be a large number,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`bigM` (see ["Big M method" on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_M_method)) is used to formulate certain types of constraints and should be a large number,
```

These can be used when visualising your results.
Second, it specifies its parent, `conversion`, its inflow carrier `gas`, and its outflow carrier `heat`, thus setting itself up as a gas to heat conversion technology.
This is followed by the definition of constraining parameters and costs;
the only cost class used is monetary but this is where other "costs", such as emissions, could be defined.

The second technology is `chp` (combined heat and power), and serves as an example of a possible conversion_plus technology making use of two output carriers.

<figure>
<img src="../../img/conversion_plus_chp.svg", width="100%", style="background-color:white;", alt="The layout of a more complex node which makes use of multiple output carriers.">
<figcaption>The layout of a more complex node which makes use of multiple output carriers.</figcaption>
</figure>

This definition in the example model's configuration is more verbose:

```yaml
--8<-- "src/calliope/example_models/urban_scale/model_config/techs.yaml:chp"
```

Again, `chp` has the definitions for name, color, parent, and carrier_in/out.
It has two carriers defined for its outflow.

> The _custom_ parameter `heat_to_power_ratio` is used to create a link between the two output carriers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the parameter `heat_to_power_ratio`, which we set to 0.8.
We will use this to create a link between the two output carriers.
More importantly, it is a _custom parameter_ - Calliope itself does not define `heat_to_power_ratio` and therefore, for now, it will not have any effect. We need to introduce our own custom math, to which we will turn our attention next.
```

> In this case, 0.8 units of heat are produced every time a unit of electricity is produced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, we want to ensure that 0.8 units of heat are produced every time a unit of electricity is produced.
```

> to produce these units of energy, gas consumption is only a function of electricity output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, while producing these units of energy - both electricity and heat - we want to ensure that gas consumption is only a function of electricity output.
```

### :sparkles: Interlude: custom math

> The base Calliope math does not have the capacity to handle the `chp` technology definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The base Calliope math does not have the capacity to handle our `chp` technology definition from above.
```

By default, setting two output carriers would mean that the choice is _between_ those technologies (e.g., a heat pump that can produce heat _or_ cooling).
To ensure our `chp` will be constrained as we expect, we add custom math:

```yaml

> --8<-- "example_models/urban_scale/custom_math.yaml"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--8<-- "src/calliope/example_models/urban_scale/custom_math.yaml"
```

```yaml
--8<-- "src/calliope/example_models/urban_scale/model_config/locations.yaml:N1"
```

### Revenue by export

You will have seen that both the `chp` and `pv` technologies define an export carrier (`carrier_export`).
This means they can export their produced electricity directly out of the system as well as using it to meet demands within the system.
Since export "cost" is a negative value for both technologies, they can accrue _revenue_ by exporting electricity.

The revenue from PV export varies depending on location, emulating the different feed-in tariff structures that might exist between e.g. commercial and domestic properties.
In domestic properties, the revenue is generated by simply having the installation (per kW installed capacity), as export is not metered.
Export is metered in commercial properties, thus revenue is generated directly from export (per kWh exported).
The revenue generated by CHP depends on the electricity grid wholesale price per kWh, being 80% of that.
Therefore, the export "cost" for CHP is loaded from a CSV file of time-varying values.
These revenue possibilities are reflected in the technologies' and locations' definitions.

---

> To try loading and solving the model yourself, see the accompanying notebook [here][running-the-urban-scale-example-model]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! info "Where to go next"
    To try loading and solving the model yourself, move on to the accompanying notebook [here][running-the-urban-scale-example-model].
```
